# Exam 2 Possible Questions

## Chapter 6 Igneous Rocks

1. Define magma. Completely describe the three physical conditions
   needed to cause melting. Sketch a graph of the oceanic geotherm.
Label axes and describe and label all parts of the graph.

  **Magma** is a mixture of molten or semi-molten rock, volatiles and
  solids found beneath the earth's surface. Magma forms better with 
   * decompression as pressure increases, melting point increases. Thus if
     super hot rocks quicky move up the sea level, they would become
  molten.
   * Melting due to the addition of volatiles. By adding H2O or CO2 mix
     with hot rocks breaks the chemical bonds and makes the rocks melt
  easier.
   * Melting due to heat transfer from rising magma. Heat transfer,
     radition occurs on a large scale underground.

    ![Oceanic geotherm](../../raw/master/images/oceanicgeotherm.jpg)

2. There are four magma types. I talked about three most often in class.
   Discuss two of the magma types (not intermediate) by including
viscosity, temperature, dominant elements and resultant rocks of each.
  * Felsic - 66%-76% silica. Rhyolite, Granites. Tend to have more Na
    than Ca. High viscosity, with tendenancy to have very expolosive
eruptions. Lower temperature than mafic.
  * Mafic - 45% - 52% silica, basalts , Gabbro. Tend to have more Ca
    than Na. Less explosive because the viscosity is lower. Hawaii has
many mafic volcanoes. Higher temperature than felsic
3. The largest volume of igneous rocks can be found as intrusives in the
   Earth’s crust. List and describe/define the five intrusive igneous
  * Dike - Dike cuts across layers. Devils' Tower, Wyoming.
  * Sill - pushes between layers of rock and is confined in the layer.
  * Laccolith - Pool of lava and magma.
  * Batholist - Bigger laccolith
  * Plutons - Lava pit below volcano. The can take millions of years to
    cool.

bodies discussed in class.

## Chapter 8 Metamorphism 

2. There are four different causes of metamorphism which turn protoliths
   into metamorphic rocks. Describe these.  Be brief but specific in
your answer.

    * Increase of temperature - Chemical bonds bend and stretch. If they
      break they can move slightly and re-attach to other atoms.
    * Increase of pressure - Pressure causes materials to collapse
      inward. Apply pressure and denser minerals tend to form through
      phase changes.
    * Differential stress - a material is pulled or squeezed unequally.
      *Normal Stress* is a push or pull perpendicular. *Shear Stress*
      moves one part of a material sideways relative to another part.
    * Addition of hydrofluids - fluid forms under high temp and pressure
      and has characteristics of a both a gas and liquid. It can
      permeate rock like a gas and seep into any opening and chemically react
      with the rock. It is a solution.

## Chapter 9 Volcanoes 

1. Discuss the differences between composite (stratovolcanoes) and
   shield volcanoes. Be sure to include composition, relative viscosity
and temperature of lava, effusive vs. explosive release (gas content),
relative slope, height (relief) of each volcano and an example of where
in the world you would find each.
   * Sheild Volcano - The tallest volcanoes ~9km, small slope. Mt.
     Kilimanjaro and in Hawaii. Low viscosity (Mafic) lava. Higher temp.
Sheilds have a central caldera where lava flows from and flank eruptions
on its sides'. The new lava flow adds to the height. Typically a
basaltic flow. More effusive.
   * Stratovolcano - ~3km height, steep slope. Mt. Fuji, Mt. Vesuvius
     and Mt. Shasta. High viscosity (Falsic) lava. More of a andesitic
flow, rhyoltic dome or spire. Has crater in the center. Layers of
pyroclast, flank vents and domes on the sides. Sills and dikes, and lava
flows. Felsic to intermediate composition. More explosive

2. List and completely describe five volcanic hazards.
   * Lava Flows => streams of molten rock, slow in speed, intermediate
     to mafic composition. They add to the land as the flow.
   * Pyroclastic Flows => avalanche of rock material, hot ash and gas.
     up to 80km/h and 700C! Can incinerate, burn, and asphyxiate ppl.
   * Lahars => wet cement like slurry, formation requires
      1. An adequate water source
      2. Abundant unconsolidated debris
      3. Steep slopes at source
      4. Triggering mechanism.
   * Landslides => Volcanic activity weakens the land around them. The
     vibrations can trigger mass amounts of earth to fall down a
mountain slope.
   * Acid Rains - the volcanic gases form from SO2 and cause water
     contamination and plant damage. Wind can make the impact radius much
further.

## Chapter 11 Crustal Deformation and Mountain Building

1. There are five major kinds of folds. Describe each by the type of
   stress applied, shape, and where you can find each type on Earth. A
sketch of each is REQUIRED to answer this question and must include
labels of old and young rocks.
  * Anticline

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  * Syncline


  |  

  |  
 
  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  * Monocline  

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  * Open fold    

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  * Tight fold

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  * Plunging fold

  |  

  |  

  | 

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  
  
  * Nonplunging fold

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

  |  

  |  

  | 

2. There are four types of faults – two of vertical and two of
   horizontal movement. Describe each by the type of stress applied and
where you can find each type on Earth. A sketch of each is REQUIRED to
answer this question.
  * Normal

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |
   
  |

  |
   
  |
   
  * Thrust or Reverse

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |
   
  * Strike-slip faults. San Andreas Fault. Shearing force.

  |
   
  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |
   
  * Oblique-slip faults 

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |

  |
   

## Chapter 10 Earthquakes

1. Define earthquake. These terms are used in defining an earthquake as
   well - - define these terms: hypocenter, epicenter, types of seismic
waves used in finding the epicenter and magnitude.
    * hypocenter - or focus is the point underground where seismic waves
      radiate from... the point of first rupture.

    * epicenter - point directly above the hypocenter on the ground
      surface.

    * seismic waves
      * S-waves - shear waves
      * P-waves - faster waves.
      * surface waves - what we feel on the earth's surface.

    * Traingulation of S and P waves for various seismographs.
    
    * Magnitude is measured by the strongest wave recorded for that
      seismograph using a computer typically. 

2. List and describe five types of damage that result from a large
   earthquake.

    1. Landslides - rocks and soil are loosened from the vibrations
       land with buildings can shift.
    2. Sediment liquefication - Wet clay layer under the soil, an
       earthquake causes the clay water bond to break and the top layers
       begin to slide on the clay.
    3. Tsunamis - Vibrations in the ocean cause giant waves that can hit
       the land and cause mass damage.
    4. Ground Shaking - Seismic waves created more damage when traveling
       through water saturated soils. 
    5. Flooding?



## Chapter 4 Plate Tectonics

2. Define plate boundary. Describe the three different types of plate
   boundaries to include stresses applied, resultant faulting, foci
depths of earthquakes and an example of where the boundary is found on
Earth.
   Plate Boundaries - found at the edge of the lithospheric plates.
   1. Convergent - one plate is overriding the other. Thus one forces
      the other down into the mantle. These boundaries form trenches and
      island arc systems. Compression
   2. Divergent - divergent plate boundaries are spreading at the
      center. Ocean ridges are creating due to the rising magma when the
      two plates seperate. Tension is applied
   3. Conservative or Tranform - two plates sliding past one another.
      Shearing and tension are applied. San andreas Fault is a great
      example
  



